Here are the top 10 things you need to


know about statistics.


Must know number one, types of data.


Before we calculate averages, draw


graphs, or talk about probability, we


first need to understand what type of


data we're working with. The first big


decision we make is whether our data is


qualitative or quantitative. Qualitative


data is non-numerical.


The values the variable can take are


often just characteristics of the


variable or different categories of the


variable. And a qualitative variable


could be split further into two


different subtypes. A qualitative


variable could be either nominal or


ordinal. A qualitative variable is a


nominal variable if the values the


variable can take, such as its


characteristics or categories, have no


natural order. An example of a variable


that's nominal would be favorite sport.


The values that that variable can take


would be sports such as hockey, golf,


and soccer. There's no natural order to


those categories of hockey, golf, and


soccer. They can be written in any


order. So that's why we say that is a


nominal qualitative variable. But an


ordinal qualitative variable, the values


that the variable can take do have a


natural order. So for example, a movie


rating. If you were asked to pick


between the categories of bad, fair, and


good to describe a movie, there is a


natural order to those categories. Fair


is better than bad, and good is better


than fair. So there's an order to those,


which is why this is an ordinal


qualitative variable. And now let's move


on to quantitative variables.


Quantitative data is numerical. It tells


us how many or how much and we can do


arithmetic with it. And quantitative


data can be further subdivided into two


categories. A quantitative variable can


be discrete


or continuous. A discrete variable comes


from counting. And within a given range,


a discrete variable can only take on a


finite number of values. So, a couple of


examples of discrete variables would be


counting the number of goals scored or


the number of students in a class. If we


think about the number of students, the


reason why it's discreet is because


within a range, let's say the range from


5 to 10 students, there's only a finite


number of values the variable can take.


There could be five students, 6 7 8 9 or


10. That's it. There's no other options,


which is why this is a discrete


variable. But a continuous variable is a


variable whose values we get from


measuring something. And within a given


range, there would be an infinite number


of possible values that the variable


could take. Some examples of continuous


variables would be let's say height and


temperature. Thinking about height, the


reason why it's a continuous


quantitative variable is because within


some range, let's say between 150 and


160 cm, there are an infinite number of


heights that somebody could be. They


could be 151, 155,


157.832.


There's an infinite number of values the


variable could take, which is why it is


a continuous quantitative variable.


Must know number two, measures of


central tendency. Let's say we had a


sample of test scores from a statistics


class. Let's say we were interested in


describing the center of this set of


data. Well, there are three different


ways for describing the center of a set


of data. They're called the measures of


central tendency, which are the mean,


the median, and the mode. The mean is


commonly called the average. And if we


were to find the average test score for


the seven students in the sample, that


would be like saying if we were to take


all of the marks that they got and


equally distributed them amongst the


seven students, how many would each


student get? Well, we can find that


average by using the formula for a


sample mean. It would look like this.


Xbar, which means the sample mean is


equal to I would have to add up all of


my data values, which I communicate by


writing the sum with a capital sigma of


X divided by the total number of data


values that I have, N. And it's


important to note that we use this Xbar


symbol for a mean when we're finding a


sample mean. In this question, we just


have a sample of test scores. if we had


all of the data for the entire


population, we would instead use the


Greek symbol mu to indicate that it's a


population mean. So for this question,


when finding the sample mean, I just


have to add up all of the data values


that I have and then divide by the total


number of data values that I have, which


in this case, our sample size was 7. So


my sample mean would be 572 / 7 which is


about 81.7.


So the average score on this test was


about 81.7%.


The next way we can describe the center


of a set of data is with the median


which just refers to the middlemost


value in a set of data. When you think


median, think middle. And that's because


the median is the middle value when the


data is arranged from least to greatest.


And you can find the location of the


median using the formula n + one all


divided by two where n stands for the


number of data values in your set. So


for our sample of test scores, I have


them already arranged from least to


greatest. So I can find the middlemost


value using this formula n + 1 / 2 where


I'll replace the n with seven because we


have seven test scores in our sample. 7


+ 1 is 8 / 2 is 4. That means the fourth


data value in my ordered list is going


to be the median. So I have 1 2 3.


Here's my fourth value right there, 85.


Notice that's exactly in the middle of


the data set. There are three pieces of


data to the left of it and three pieces


of data to the right. So 85 is in the


middle, which means our median is 85.


And it should also be noted that if you


have an even number of data values in


your set, the median is actually going


to be the average of the two middlemost


values in the data set. And then the


last way we can describe the center of a


set of data is with the mode. And when


you hear mode, think most. And that's


because the mode of a data set is just


the value or values that occur the most


frequently. So if we look at our sample


of test scores, the only number that


occurs more than once is the number 85.


There are two of them. So 85 occurs the


most frequently, which means our mode is


85. And we should make a note that a set


of data could have multiple or no mode


in our data set if there were no values


that were repeated. So if they all only


occurred once, we would say there was no


mode. But if there were two different


data values that were tied for repeating


the most amount of times, then they


could both be the mode.


Must know number three, measures of


spread. Let's say we have a sample of


how many hours eight different students


spent studying for a test. In this


section, I'm going to show you the


different measures of spread we can


calculate. We could calculate the range,


the interquartile range or the standard


deviation. The range is just the


difference between the largest and


smallest values of the data set. So the


formula for the range is to do the


maximum data value minus the minimum


data value and that finds the total


distance between the maximum and minimum


values. It tells you how spread out in


total the data set is. So the overall


range of our sample of hours studied for


a test would be the maximum value 10


minus the minimum number of hours


studied for the test which was 1. So the


overall range is 10 - 1 which is 9


hours. For the interquartile range what


we're measuring is not the spread of the


entire set of data but just the spread


of the middle 50% of the data. And the


formula to calculate the interquartile


range involves quartile values. We have


to do the third quartile value Q3 minus


the first quartile value Q1. And what


quartile values are, they're just values


that divide the data set into four equal


parts. And now to use this formula,


we're going to have to look carefully at


our data set and find our quartile


values. We should start by making sure


that our values are in ascending order,


which they are. And now I want to find


the quartile values that divide this


data into four equal parts. The first


thing we'll do is find Q2, the second


quartile value, which is the value that


divides the data in half. So it's just


going to be the median of the data set.


Since there are 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 pieces


of data, there's not going to be one


number in the middle of this set. It's


going to be the average of the two


middlemost numbers. So the average of


the fourth and fifth data points. So the


average of five and five is just five.


So our median is between five and five.


We call that median Q2. So our Q2 is


five. Notice that Q2 divides the data in


half. There are four pieces of data to


the left and four pieces of data to the


right. We can find Q1, our first


quartile value, by looking at the lower


half of the data and finding the median


of the lower half. Well, the median of


the lower half is going to be the


average of the two middlemost numbers.


The average of 2 and 4 is three. So Q1


is between 2 and 4, which is three. And


then to find Q4, I look at the upper


half of the data and find the median of


the upper half. Because there are four


data points, the median is going to be


the middle of the second and third


values. So the average of 6 and 7 is


6.5. So Q3 will be between 6 and 7,


which is 6 1/2.


Notice these three quartile values


divide the data into four equal


sections. Each section has two pieces of


data. So it divides the data into


quarters which is why these are called


quartile values. And now I can use these


quartile values to find a calculation


for how spread out the middle half of


the data is by doing Q3 minus Q1 which


with this sample data set would be 6 1/2


- 3 which is 3.5.


So the range 9 tells us how spread out


the entire data set is. But the


interquartile range 3.5 tells us how


spread out just the middle half of the


data is. And the last measure of spread


we want to look at is the standard


deviation. A standard deviation is just


a typical distance of data values from


the mean. Now this data set, if I were


to find the mean, let me do that


quickly. Since it's a sample, I use Xbar


for the mean. To calculate Xbar, I find


the sum of all the data values. If I add


them together, I get 40. And then I


divide by how many pieces of data I


have, which is 8. So the mean 40 / 8 is


5. So on average in this sample students


studied for 5 hours. When finding the


standard deviation, what I'm trying to


find is what is the typical distance of


each of these data points 1 2 4 5 6 7.


What's the typical distance of each of


those from the average of five? Right?


The person who studied for 1 hour was 4


hours less than the average. The person


who studied for 10 hours was 5 hours


more than the average. But what is the


typical distance of the data values from


that mean? And to calculate it, we can


use the standard deviation formula for


sample data. The standard deviation is


equal to the sum of all the squared


deviations


/ n minus one and then square rooted.


Now let's talk about a couple things


about this formula. When we do each data


point X minus the sample mean Xbar, what


we're calculating is each data point's


distance from the mean, which we call


its deviation, and then we square all of


the deviations to make them positive.


And we want to do that before adding


them together because when we add the


deviations together, we don't want the


positive and negative deviations to


cancel each other out and make the data


set look artificially close to the mean.


So because we just have sample data for


this question, we don't know the true


population mean, which means we have to


use the sample itself to calculate the


average Xbar. And when we do that, we


lose one degree of freedom by using that


sample mean. So that's why we divide by


n minus one instead of n to correct for


that underestimation of variability in


our data. And the last part to explain


about the formula is the square root


symbol. Because we squared the


deviations, we've now changed the units


of our original data points. So to


return the same units of our original


data set, we then need to square root


our result. And I should also point out


that the formula would be slightly


different if we had data for the entire


population. If we were finding the


population standard deviation, we would


use the symbol sigma instead of an s and


we would be dividing by n instead of n


minus one. But for this sample data,


we'll use this formula to calculate the


standard deviation. The standard


deviation would equal I need to find the


sum of all the squared deviations of


each of these data points. So I'll start


with my first data point one, find its


deviation from the mean five, by doing 1


minus 5 and then squaring it plus then


move on to my next data point two. find


its deviation from the mean of five by


doing 2 - 5 and then square that plus do


that for all of the data points until we


get to the last data point of 10 and


find its deviation from the mean of five


by doing 10 - 5 and then square it. I


then would have to divide the sum of the


squares of the deviations by n minus one


where n is the number of data points in


our sample. We have eight pieces of data


so our n value is 8. So I divide by 8 -


1


and then I of course have to square root


this result. If I were to evaluate this,


I would figure out that the standard


deviation or a typical distance from the


mean for my data set is about 2.8.


Must know number four, graphing data. So


far we've described data numerically


using measures of center and measures of


spread. But numbers alone don't always


reveal patterns. Graphs allow us to see


the distribution of data, making trends,


clusters, and outliers easier to


recognize. Now, there's lots of


different types of graphs we can use.


And choosing the right type depends on


what type of data we have. So, I'm going


to give you two different data sets. A


set of qualitative data and a set of


quantitative data. For the set of


qualitative data, our variable is


favorite school subject. favorite school


subject is a qualitative variable


because the values that that variable


could take would be non-numerical. They


would be categories such as math,


science, English, and history. Now,


let's say we have a set of data where 12


students chose math as their favorite


subject, nine students chose science,


three chose English, and six chose


history. If I want to display this data


using a graph because it is a


qualitative set of data, the best


options are either a bar chart which if


we look closely at has a bar for each of


the categories that we have for our


variable. There's a bar for math,


science, English, and history. And the


height of the bar corresponds to its


frequency. So, the height of the bar for


math is 12 because there were 12


students that chose math as their


favorite subject. And an important thing


to note about bar charts is that there


are spaces between each of the bars


because for qualitative data, there's no


overlap in the categories. But bar


charts aren't exclusively used for


qualitative data. We can sometimes use a


bar chart for discrete quantitative


data. And now there's one more graph I


want to show you that is great for


qualitative data. So let me make a bit


of room by shrinking this bar chart and


show you a pie chart.


Looking carefully at this pie chart,


it's a great way to visualize each


category's proportion of the total


frequency. And that's because the area


of each of the sectors corresponds to


the proportion of the total frequency


for that category. We can clearly see


with this visualization that the area of


this sector is the biggest and that's


the math category. And now let's move on


to another set of data. This time we'll


have a set of quantitative data. Our


variable for this data set is student


heights. And let's say we have a sample


of 20 different student heights.


Because student heights are a


quantitative and continuous variable,


right? Within any interval, for example,


between 155 and 160, there would be an


infinite number of heights that a


student could be. So, it's a continuous


quantitative variable. A great way to


visualize a continuous quantitative


variable is a histogram. To make a


histogram, the first thing we should do


is make sure the data is in proper


ascending order, which it is. And then


we want to divide the data up into


intervals and make a frequency table


that shows how many pieces of data are


within each interval.


The first thing we have to decide is how


many intervals should I divide the data


into. A good rule of thumb is somewhere


between 5 and 10 so we can see trends in


the data without the graph getting too


noisy. And because this is a relatively


small data set, I'll just divide it into


five intervals. If I look closely at the


intervals I've created, I have 1 2 3 4 5


intervals. Each of the intervals has a


width of 6. So we say the bin width is


6. The first interval are all of the


data values that are greater than or


equal to 149.5 but less than 155.5.


And notice the next interval starts


right where the previous interval left


off. It's all the data values that are


greater than or equal to 155.5 but less


than 161.5. And now there's not one


general rule for how we decide how many


intervals or what the width of each of


the intervals have to be. But we choose


a number of intervals that are good for


showing a trend in the data set that we


have. And also we choose a width of


intervals so that it covers at least the


entire range of the original data set.


So it has to go at least from 151 to


178. Mine goes from 149.5 to 179.5. And


now all we have to do is tally up how


many of these pieces of data fall into


each of these intervals. Well, in the


first interval from 149.5 to 155.5


would be the first 1 2 3 pieces of data.


So the frequency for that interval is


three. And then I could do that for each


of the remaining intervals. And what I


can do with that frequency table is now


make a histogram. So, let me shrink the


table a little bit and I'll make a


template for my histogram. Along the


bottom will be my intervals of heights


and then my vertical axis will be the


frequencies. And then within each


interval, I need to draw a bar whose


height corresponds to the frequency


associated with that interval. And


notice for a histogram, an important


distinction between a histogram and a


bar chart is that for a histogram, there


are no spaces between the bars. And now


another great representation for


quantitative data is a box plot. So let


me make some room by shrinking this


histogram. And let me make a box plot


for this data. To draw a box plot, what


I first have to do is find what's called


a five number summary. I have to find


the min value, the max value, and the


three quartile values. While looking at


the data set, the min value is 151, and


the max value is 178. And next, I can


find my quartile values. Q2 is the


median of the data set. Since there's 20


pieces of data, the median would be the


middle of the 10th and the 11th piece of


data. So in between 163 and 164 is


163.5. And then Q1 would be the median


of the lower half of the data. So the


median of the first 10 values, which


would be the middle of the fifth and the


sixth value. So between 158 and 159


would be 158.5.


And Q3 would be the median of the upper


half of the data. There's 10 pieces in


the upper half. So it'll be the middle


of the fifth and the 6th. The middle of


168 and 170 is 169. And now a box plot


is just a way of visualizing that five


number summary. So I'll start by drawing


an axis that covers at least a span of


151 to 178. And then I draw a box that


spans all the way from Q1 158.5


to Q3 169. And then within the box, you


draw a vertical line at the second


quartile value, 163.5. And then on the


left side of the box, you extend a


whisker all the way to the minimum


value, 151. And on the other side of the


box, you draw a whisker that goes to the


max value, 178. Box plots are great for


visualizing the spread of a set of data.


You can see the range all the way from


the min to the max, but you can also see


the interquartile range between Q1 and


Q3.


Must know number five, probability


basics. Probability is the measure of


how likely an event is to occur. It's


expressed as a number between zero,


meaning the event is impossible, and


one, meaning the event is certain. So,


every event has a probability of


occurring somewhere between 0 and 1. And


the closer the probability is to one,


the more likely it is the event will


occur. And there are different ways of


communicating the probability of an


event occurring. It could be expressed


as a decimal. So for example, 7 is a


probability or as a percentage. A


probability of 7 means there's a 70%


chance of an event occurring. Or that


equivalently could be expressed as a


fraction 7 out of 10. And there are two


basic ways to think about probability.


There is theoretical probability and


experimental probability. Theoretical


probability is the probability based on


what should happen. And the formula for


calculating the theoretical probability


of an event happening would be the


probability of event A is equal to the


number of ways event A can occur which


we call the number of elements in the


event space divided by the total number


of possible outcomes which we say is the


number of elements in the sample space.


So basically this formula just takes the


number of favorable outcomes and divides


it by the total number of possible


outcomes. So for example, let's


calculate a couple different


probabilities. If you roll a standard


six-sided die, let's in part a calculate


the probability of rolling a three. To


do that, we would need to know the total


number of elements in the event space.


So, how many sides of the die are a


three? And then divide that by the total


number of elements in the sample space,


which would mean how many different


possible outcomes are there when you


roll a dieice. How many sides does the


die have? Well, in our event space,


since the event we're finding the


probability of is rolling a three, the


only element in our event space is


actually a three. But our sample space,


there are six sides on the die. So,


there are actually six different


elements in our sample space. You could


roll a 1 2 3 4 5 or six. In our event


space, there's only one element. So, the


number of ways to roll a three. Well,


there's only one way to roll a three


since there's only one side of the die


that has a three. And that needs to be


divided by the number of elements in our


sample space. There are six elements


there. So, it has to be divided by six.


So, our probability of rolling a three


is 1 out of six. And then in part B,


let's find the probability of rolling


two threes in a row. So we'll roll a


three and then another three. These two


events, rolling a three and then another


a three, are independent of each other.


So I can calculate the probability of


both of them happening just by


multiplying their probabilities


together. Just do the probability of


rolling the first three times the


probability of rolling the second three.


Well, the probability of rolling a three


is always 1 out of six. So I just do 1


out of six times another 1 out of six.


which tells me I have a 1 out of 36


chance of rolling two threes in a row.


And now let's move on to experimental


probability, which is the probability


based on results of an experiment. And


the formula for experimental probability


looks the same. The probability of event


A occurring would equal the number of


times that event A occurred divided by


the total number of trials of the


experiment.


So let's do an example where we roll a


dieice 20 times and calculate what the


experimental probability of rolling a


three is. So to find the experimental


probability of rolling a three, we


actually have to roll a dieice 20 times


and see how many of those outcomes are a


three. So the probability of rolling a


three would equal the number of threes


we get divided by the total number of


trials. So let's roll 20 dice.


And notice only two of them were a


three. So the experimental probability


of rolling a three in this experiment


well the number of threes that occurred


was two and the number of trials we did


were 20. So 2 out of 20 or that reduces


to 1 out of 10 or as a percentage that's


a 10% chance of rolling a three in this


experiment. But we know the theoretical


probability is 1 out of six which is


about 17%. But the key connection


between these two types of probabilities


is that as we run more trials in an


experiment, the experimental probability


tends to get closer and closer and


closer to the theoretical probability.


So if instead of rolling 20 dice, we


rolled 100 or a,000 dice, we would see


this 10%, this 1 out of 10 get closer


and closer and closer to this 1 out of


six probability.


must know. Number six, discrete


probability distributions. A discrete


probability distribution shows all the


possible values of a discrete random


variable and the probability of each


value. Now, there are lots of different


types of discrete random variables that


we could make probability distributions


for. There's a hypergeometric discrete


random variable, which is the number of


successes in a fixedsiz sample taken


without replacement from a finite


population. There's a geometric discrete


random variable which is the number of


trials required to obtain the first


success. There's a pluson discrete


random variable which is the number of


events occurring in a fixed interval of


time or space. Or the one we're going to


focus on with an example in this


question is a binomial discrete random


variable which is the number of


successes in a fixed number of


independent trials where the probability


of success remains constant for each


trial. So let's do an example. You roll


a six-sided die three times. Create a


theoretical probability distribution for


the number of sixes rolled. Our variable


for this question is the number of sixes


rolled. Rolling a six would be


considered having a success. And we want


to know how many successes can we have


in a fixed number of three trials. Each


of those trials are independent of each


other. Right? For each of the three


trials, you have the same probability of


rolling a six. you have a 1 out of six


chance in each of the trials, which is


why this is a binomial experiment. And


we say this variable is a binomial


discrete random variable because there


is a discrete number of values that it


can take. In three trials, we could have


either 0, 1, 2, or three of the roles be


a six. That's a finite number of values,


which is why this is a discrete random


variable. Now, let's try and show the


probability distribution, which means


show all of those possible number of


successes with their probabilities. And


there are three ways we can do that. We


could create a function that shows the


probability of each possible value of


the variable and that function is called


a probability mass function. Or we can


make a table of all the possible values


and the probabilities of those values.


Or we could make a graph showing the


probabilities of each of the possible


values of the variable. Let's start with


creating the probability mass function


which is a function that gives us the


probability of each possible value of


the variable. Now every discrete random


variable can be defined by a probability


mass function. The probability mass


function for a binomial random variable


takes on a very specific form. The


probability of that random variable's


number of successes being k would be


equal to n choose k multiplied by p to


the power of k multiplied by 1 minus p


to the power of n minus k where in this


formula n is our number of trials p is


the probability of success and k is the


number of successes. So now we can write


the specific version of this formula for


our experiment. The probability of our


random variable X which stands for the


number of sixes rolled equaling some


number of successes K will be equal to


the number of trials three choose K


multiplied by the probability of success


on each trial which is 1 out of six. You


have a 1 out of six chance of rolling a


six to the exponent of the number of


successes. K multiplied by the


probability of failure. Well, you have a


five out of six chance


of not rolling a six to the exponent of


the number of failures which would be


the number of trials three minus your


number of successes K. And for this


formula to represent the whole binomial


probability distribution, we should


state for what number of successes, for


what values of K could we sub into this


formula for? Well, since we do three


trials, the number of successes we could


have, the number of sixes that could be


rolled in those three trials are either


0, 1, 2, or three. Now, let me make a


bit of room, and then we'll make a table


for the probability distribution. In the


table, we'll have two columns. The left


column will be the number of successes


which we've called K and that represents


the number of sixes rolled. And the


right column will be the probability of


our random variable X taking on that


value of K. What are the possible values


for K? How many successes could we have?


Remember, we listed them here. In the


three trials, we could either roll 0, 1,


2, or three sixes. And then to find the


probabilities associated with each


number of successes, I can use this


probability mass function that we made.


For the probability of successes being


zero, I'll just sub0 in for the K's in


the formula I made earlier. And if I


simplify this, I would get a probability


of 125 out of 216.


And then I could sub each of those


remaining three possible values for K


into my probability mass function and


get the following probabilities. So that


completed table is another way to show


the entire probability distribution. It


shows all the possible values of the


discrete random variable and all of


their probabilities. And then another


way to visualize this, I'll make a bit


more room. We could make a graph that


shows each of those probabilities. We're


on the graph. the x- axis are my


possible number of successes, the number


of sixes rolled. And on the y-axis is my


probability of having each of those


number of successes. And then for each


of the possible values of k, I'll draw a


bar with a height equal to its


probability. So there are three ways an


equation, table or graph that we can


show the probability distribution of any


discrete random variable.


must know. Number seven, continuous


probability distributions. There's lots


of different types of continuous


probability distributions such as


normal, exponential, t distributions,


and many more. For this section, we'll


focus on normal distributions. A


continuous probability distribution


describes a random variable that can


take any value in an interval of real


numbers where probabilities are assigned


to ranges of values rather than


individual outcomes. So, a couple things


to unpack about this definition. First


of all, because it's a continuous


probability distribution, it's going to


be the distribution of a continuous


random variable, which means within an


interval, there's an infinite number of


values the variable can take. So, for


example, if our variable is the height


of adult men, within a certain interval,


there's an infinite number of heights


the man can be. So, the probability of


any one specific height is actually


zero. We can only for a continuous


random variable find the probability of


the variable being within a range of


values. This is unlike discrete random


variables. For discrete random


variables, we could define them with a


probability mass function that gave us


the probability of the variable being an


exact value. But for continuous random


variables, the probability of it being


any exact value is zero. So we can't use


a probability mass function to define


it. Instead, we have to use what's


called a probability density function or


PDF for short. What this function does,


it shows the distribution of values with


the area under the curve over an


interval representing the probability


the variable falls in that range. And to


help you understand these probability


density functions, let me show you the


graph of a PDF for a normal


distribution. So here we have the graph


of the probability density function for


our continuous random variable X that is


approximately normal with a given mean


and standard deviation. Now depending on


what the mean and standard deviation of


the variable is that could shift this


graph or stretch or compress it. But


they do all have this same general shape


where the mean is right in line with the


highest value of the probability density


function. So the mean would be right in


the middle. I'll write mu the symbol for


the population mean right in the middle


underneath the highest peak. And then by


convention we increase and decrease at


intervals equal to whatever the


population standard deviation is. So one


unit to the right of the population mean


would be one standard deviation bigger


than the mean. So the mean plus sigma.


And then the next unit to the right


would be the mean plus two standard


deviations.


And then the mean plus three standard


deviations. And then the same thing to


the left of the mean. Just go down by a


standard deviation each time. And then


keep in mind for this graph the y-axis


is the probability density


which is not equal to the probability of


our variable taking on a specific value.


For example, if our random variable x


was equal to some value a, the height of


the graph at that x value of a does not


tell us the probability of x equaling a.


All the function can do is give us the


probability of our random variable being


within a range of values. So we could


tell us the probability of X being


between A and some other value, let's


say B. If I wanted the probability of it


being between A and B, it's actually the


area underneath this curve that would


give us the probability of it being


between A and B. That's what the


probability density function does. its


area under the curve within an interval


gives us the probability of the variable


being within that interval. So I could


communicate that by saying the


probability of the random variable being


between a and b is actually equal to the


area under the curve between a and b


which we could say is equal to the


definite integral from a to b of our


probability density function f ofx dx.


And actually the total area underneath


this normal curve for all normally


distributed data the total area is equal


to one. And some common areas to


remember would be that within one


standard deviation of the mean you would


find 68% of the data. Meaning the area


under the curve between those two values


the area under the curve in that section


would be about 68.


And then within two standard deviations


of the mean about 95% of the values lie


within that range. So the area under the


curve between two standard deviations


less and two standard deviations more


than the mean would be about.95.


And then within three standard


deviations of the mean you would find


99.7%.


And lastly, let's talk about a very


special type of normal distribution


called the standard normal distribution.


For a standard normal distribution, the


normally distributed variable has a


population mean of zero and a standard


deviation of one. And with those values,


I could label all of those points on the


x-axis. And notice those values actually


just tell us how many standard


deviations we are above or below the


mean. And those values for the standard


normal distribution are what we actually


call zcores which are going to come in


handy for the next example when we need


to find an area underneath the curve. We


can translate any x value into a zcore


and then use a zcore table to find the


area underneath the probability density


function of that standard normal


distribution. So let's go ahead and do


an example where we practice that. Let


me make some room. The example says that


a random variable X is the height of


adult men where the values of the


variable are approximately normally


distributed with a population mean of


175 and a population standard deviation


of 6. We'll assume that's in


centimeters. And what we want to do is


calculate the probability that the


height of an adult man is less than or


equal to


184 cm. So what will be helpful to solve


this question would be start by drawing


a graph of the probability density


function of this normally distributed


variable. And what the question asks us


to find is the probability that the


height is less than or equal to 184. So


on my graph 184 is going to be right in


between 181 and 187. And since we want


the probability of that variable being


less than or equal to 184 graphically


that means I want the area underneath


this probability density function to the


left of 184. So I want the area that I'm


going to shade in here. And now let me


make a bit of room because in order to


find the area on this graph to the left


of 184, I'm going to have to translate


this 184 into a zcore to find where does


it fall on the standard normal graph and


then look it up in my zcore table to


find the area. And the formula to


calculate a zcore


is equal to the data value x minus the


population mean meu divided by the


population standard deviation sigma.


That just finds how many standard


deviations away from the mean you are.


So in this case our data value is 184.


I find the difference between that and


the mean which is 175 and then I divide


by the standard deviation of six. So


what I have is 9 / 6 which is 1.5


which means this 184 is 1 and a half


standard deviations above the mean. If I


graph that 1.5 on the standard normal


graph over here. Notice 1.5 would be


right here. And if I find the area to


the left of 1.5 on the standard normal


graph. So if I find this area that I'm


shading in here, notice that that area


shaded in is exactly equal to that area


shaded in. So what I can do is just find


this area on the left using a zcore


table. I can look up 1.5 on a zcore


table. And when looking up a value on a


zcore table, what it does is give you


the area to the left of the value we're


looking up, which is exactly what we


want in this question. I want the area


to the left of 1.5. So when I look up


1.5, I notice it says the area to the


left is 9332.


So let me make some room so I can state


my final answer. I could say that the


probability of the height of an adult


man is less than or equal to 184 is


equal to if I change that 9332 to a


percentage by multiplying by 100 that


would be 93.32%.


Must know number eight, confidence


intervals. A confidence interval is a


range of values used to estimate an


unknown population parameter. And the


general formula used to calculate a


confidence interval is that you take


your estimate for the population


parameter and then you add and subtract


a margin of error, which we calculate by


doing a critical value multiplied by


what's called a standard error. And that


product of the critical value and the


standard error is called the margin of


error for the confidence interval. And


under common conditions, the sampling


distribution of the sample mean is


approximately normal. Which just means


if we collect a bunch of samples from a


population and calculate the mean of all


those samples, the distributions of


those means would form a normal curve.


So that lets us use zcores and the


normal curve to measure uncertainty. So


a common type of confidence interval to


make for estimating a population mean is


called a zinval. The formula for a z


interval to estimate a population mean


we would have to start with our estimate


for the population mean. And for the


estimate for the population mean we use


the sample mean xbar. And then we have


to add and subtract our critical value.


And because it's a z interval we're


going to get our critical value from the


zcore table. And we call that our


critical zvalue or z star for short. And


that gets multiplied by the standard


error. And the standard error


calculation for a Z interval, you take


your population standard deviation,


which has to be known to use a Z


interval, and then divide that by the


square root of the sample size. Before


we move on to an example, let me make


sure you understand this idea of a


sampling distribution and why to get our


standard error, we have to divide the


population standard deviation by the


square root of the sample size. So if I


look at these two graphs, they're both


probability density functions. The graph


on the bottom shows a random variable


for a population that is normally


distributed with a mean of 50 and a


standard deviation of five. Whereas the


top graph shows the sampling


distribution of sample means. And let me


increase the sample size. Right now it's


set at one, which is why those graphs


look the same. Let me increase the


sample size to let's say 10. These two


graphs are showing different things. On


the bottom graph, the area to the right


of 52 is shaded and it says the area is


about.34. That means there's about a 34%


chance of the variable being greater


than 52. But the top graph is a graph of


the sample means. So the area to the


right of 52 on the top graph is about


0.1, which means there's a 10% chance


that a sample mean of size 10 from that


same population described below would be


above 52. There's a much lower chance


that the sample mean is bigger than 52


than an individual data point being


bigger than 52. And that's because if


you find the mean of a sample, it's much


more likely that that sample mean is


going to be closer to the population


mean than just any one individual data


point would be. And if I keep increasing


the sample size, right now it's at 10.


If I increase it, you'll see the


probability of the sample mean being


greater than 52 keeps going down. As the


sample size increases, the distribution


of the sample means starts to cluster


more closely towards the population mean


in the middle. And now we can go ahead


and do an example. So let me make a bit


of room. Let's construct a 95%


confidence interval for the true mean


battery life of a specific laptop given


the sample size taken is 81. The sample


mean from that sample of 81 laptops was


9.2 hours for their battery life and the


population standard deviation is known


to be.9 hours. And now if we use this


formula for the Z interval to estimate


the population mean, it tells us that


our population mean is somewhere between


our sample mean plus the margin of error


and the sample mean minus the margin of


error. And notice in this formula to get


these boundaries for our confidence


interval, all we need to know are the


sample mean, population standard


deviation, sample size, and critical ZV


value. Well, we have the sample size,


sample mean, and population standard


deviation. And so all we're missing is


the critical ZV valueue. And we can find


that critical ZV valueue by carefully


analyzing the standard normal


distribution. Since I want to find a 95%


confidence interval on the standard


normal distribution, I need to find the


ZV valueue that creates a central area


of 95%.


And if there's 95% of the data in the


center here, that leaves 5% of the data


left to be evenly distributed above that


central area and below the central area.


meaning 2.5% in both of those areas. And


in a zcore table, it always correlates a


zvalue with the area less than that


zvalue, which would be 95% plus 2.5%.


Which would be an area of.975.


So in the zcore table, if we look up an


area of.975, we would see the


corresponding zcore is 1.96. So our


critical zvalue that we'll use is 1.96.


So I can go ahead and take all four of


these values and sub them into my Z


interval formula. And then simplifying


my margins of error, the margins of


error simplify to.1 96. So basically the


true population mean is within.196


either below or above our sample mean


which we used as our estimate for the


population mean. So based on our final


interval that we've created, the correct


interpretation of it would be that we


are 95% confident that the true mean


battery life is between 9.004


and 9.396


hours. And I also want to give you a


good visual demonstration of what this


final answer actually means. So let me


make a bit of room and then I'll make a


rough sketch of the sampling


distribution of the sample means of the


battery life of this given laptop. So


basically when creating this confidence


interval what we've done we've said that


if we calculate the sample mean from


samples of size 81 from this population


of laptops that distribution of sample


means would be normally distributed like


this with the true population mean being


right in the middle of that sampling


distribution. And anytime we calculate a


sample mean from a sample of this size,


size 81, it could fall somewhere above


the true population mean or below the


true population mean. But by creating a


margin of error, which we calculated to


be.1 96, if I move that.16


both above and below the sample means,


we're 95% confident that the interval


that's created would overlap with the


true population mean. And by saying


we're 95% confident, that means 95% of


the samples of size 81 that could be


taken would overlap with the true


population mean, which means 5%


wouldn't, right? We could have a sample


mean that lies far enough from the true


population mean that the interval that's


created, notice it does not overlap with


the true population mean. But by being


95% confident, 95% of these intervals we


could create would overlap with the true


population mean.


Less number nine, hypothesis testing. To


teach you about hypothesis testing, I'm


going to show you a ki squared goodness


of fit test, which is used to determine


whether observed frequencies differ


significantly from the frequencies


expected. So to check whether observed


frequencies differ significantly from


expected frequencies, what we do is


calculate what's called a ki squar


value, which uses the Greek symbol kai.


And what this kai squared value is is


essentially a measure of how much


observed frequencies differ from


expected frequencies. So what we do for


each data point, we take the observed


frequency, subtract it from the expected


frequency, square that difference, and


then divide by the expected frequency.


We do that for each data point and then


add them all up. So we need the sum of


all those values and that's what we call


the kai square value. And when doing a k


square goodness of fit test, we always


start by making what's called a null


hypothesis. The null hypothesis always


states that the population distribution


matches the expected distribution. So


basically that means we're expecting the


right thing. Any differences between the


expected values and what's observed is


just due to random chance. And there's


actually another way to phrase this null


hypothesis, which I think is a little


easier to understand. Another way we


could phrase it is that the observed


distribution does not differ


significantly from the expected


distribution. Any difference is just due


to random chance. And if the null


hypothesis is true, then the sampling


distribution of the ki squared statistic


is right tailed. Notice this graph is


the graph of the probability density


function for the ki squar statistic. And


because this distribution is right


tailed, I can see that the area under


the curve on the left portion of the


graph is much bigger, which means


there's a higher probability of getting


a range of ki squared values that are


quite low when the observed and the


expected frequencies do not differ


significantly. And if the observed and


expected don't differ significantly,


you'd have a much lower probability of


getting a big kai squared value, right?


Because kai squared values find the


differences of the observed and expected


frequencies. And how we determine if we


accept or reject this null hypothesis is


if we look at this graph what we do is


we calculate what's called a critical k^


squ value which falls somewhere on the


x-axis of our kai square distribution.


So I'll call this my critical k^ squared


value. I'll put it right here for now.


And we actually calculate that critical


kar value based on two things that we'll


talk more about when we do an example.


Uh it's based on the degrees of freedom


and the significance level. But all you


need to know right now is that based on


that critical kai square value, we have


a region to the right of it which we


call the rejection region and an area to


the left of it which we call the don't


reject region. Now the area to the right


of the critical kai squared value


actually matches the significance level


that we choose and we call that


significance level alpha which would


mean this area to the left of the


critical kai square value would be 1


minus alpha. And then what we do to see


if we reject or accept this null


hypothesis is we calculate the observed


k^ squ statistic using this formula and


see where it falls on this graph. So


we'll have a observed k square that


falls somewhere. And then in this


diagram if we get an observed k square


that's less than the critical k^ squ


that means we accept the null hypothesis


or we say we fail to reject it. And why


do we fail to reject the null hypothesis


in this scenario? Well, remember this is


the distribution of kai squared values


if the null hypothesis is true. So if


the null hypothesis is true, getting the


observed kai squared value that we got


here has a probability that is much


larger than the significance level that


we set with the critical kar value here.


But if this observed k^ squ value was


greater than the critical kar value, we


would have to reject the null


hypothesis. And that should make sense


because remember this is the


distribution of kai squared values if


the null hypothesis is true. So getting


an observed kai squared value way up


here if the null hypothesis is true. And


remember the null hypothesis basically


tells us the observed and the expected


don't significantly differ. So having


them differ this much way up here has a


very low probability of happening if the


null hypothesis is true. So with such a


low probability of this happening, if


the null hypothesis was true, we would


have to reject the null hypothesis. And


this will all make even more sense as we


do an example, I think. So let's go


ahead and do an example. Let me make a


bit of room. It says a six-sided die is


rolled 60 times giving the following


frequencies at a 5% significance level.


Determine if the results indicate this


is a fair die. Well, if I add up all the


frequencies to find out how many times


the dice was rolled, it adds up to 60.


And if the die is fair, the probability


of rolling any one of the numbers is 1


over 6. So 60 * 1 over 6 would tell us


that the expected frequency for each one


of the faces of the die would be 1 6 *


60, which is 10. We would expect, if the


die is fair, to roll each number 10


times. But what we got were these


observed frequencies. They're not all


10. So the question we want to ask, do


these observed frequencies differ from


the expected frequency significantly or


are the differences just due to random


chance? We'll set our null hypothesis as


saying that the observed frequencies do


not differ significantly from the


expected frequency, which means the die


is fair. But what we'll have to do to


see if we need to reject this null


hypothesis or not is we're going to have


to calculate the ki squar value using


this formula for the observed


frequencies. So using that formula I can


say the observed k^ squ value


would be equal to I'll take my first


frequency 8 minus it from the expected


frequency 10 square it and then divide


by the expected frequency of 10 then


plus then I do it for my next frequency


9 do that minus the expected frequency


10 square it and divide by the expected


frequency of 10 and then I'll keep doing


that for each of the frequencies


And if we do that we get an observed k^


square value of 3.4.


And now I have to compare that observed


k^ square value to the critical k^


squared value. And the critical kar


value depends on two things. The


significance level and the degrees of


freedom. In this question the


significance level is 5%. So for the


critical kai squared value I'll set the


significance level to 05. And the


degrees of freedom is always equal to


one less than the number of categories.


Well, in the question, we have six


categories. There were six sides of the


die. So, I need to do one less than that


for my degrees of freedom. So, my


degrees of freedom I'll set to five. And


now, using a kai squared table, I can


look up the critical kai squared value


for a 5% significance level with 5


degrees of freedom and it would find


that it's equal to 11.07.


And now comparing my observed and


critical kaiquare values, I can


determine if I'm going to reject this


null hypothesis or not. And to


understand what we're going to do, let's


take a close look at this diagram for


the kai squared values that we have. Our


critical kar value was 11.07,


but the observed kar value was less than


that. It was only 3.4. So let me move


this observed k^ squared value to the


left of our critical kar value. And


since the observed kai square value is


less than the critical kai square value,


we would fail to reject the null


hypothesis. Remember our null hypothesis


is the die is fair. We can't reject that


based on the observed and critical kai


squared values. So that would make us


conclude that we think the die is likely


fair. And the reason why that is is


because the kai square value that we


observed right which is a measure of the


variation of the observed frequencies


from what is expected is much smaller


than our critical k^ squ value. Or to


help you understand that even better we


could add some probabilities to this


diagram. The area to the right of the


critical k^ 2 value which we call alpha


is always equal to our significance


level that we choose. We chose a 5%


significance level. So that area is 05


to the right of the critical kai square


value. Then we could also find the area


to the right of the observed k^ squar


value using technology. And that area to


the right of the observed k^ 2 value we


call that the p value. And if we use


technology to calculate that we would


figure out the p value is equal to about


64.


And remember this distribution is the


distribution of k square values we would


get if the die is fair. So if the die is


fair, 64% of the time you would get a ki


squared value that is at least as big as


the ki squared value that we got here,


3.4, which means there's a 64% chance of


observing a difference at least this


large from a fair die purely due to


random variation. And we decided for


this question that we would only reject


the null hypothesis if we got a kai


square value so big that it would be


bigger than the critical kai square


value that would only happen 5% of the


time due to random chance if the die is


fair. So let's write a nice concluding


statement here to summarize what we have


for this question. Since our observed


kai squared value was less than the


critical kar value, we fail to reject


the null hypothesis. That means there's


insufficient evidence that the die is


unfair. Which means for the context of


this question that the die is likely


fair.


Must know number 10, regression and


correlation. A linear regression models


the relationship between two


quantitative variables using a straight


line. So, for example, if we had two


variables, hours studied and score on a


10 question quiz, I could show the


relationship between these two


variables. First by making a scatter


plot and then to help show the


correlation between these two variables.


I could fit a straight line to this


graph to show the trend in the data. And


now, there are equations you can use to


calculate the exact equation of this


trend line so you can graph it


accurately. But often you can use


technology to generate it for you. But


what the equation and technology do to


graph it is basically it finds out where


to place the line so that the squares of


the residual values are minimized. And


now you might be thinking what is a


residual value? Well each data point has


a distance it is from the trend line. So


for example this data point its distance


from the trend line can be represented


with a vertical line and the length of


that vertical line is called the


residual value of that data point. And


every single data point has a residual


value. And not only can technology graph


that regression line for you, it can


also find a couple regression


statistics. It can find what's called a


correlation coefficient,


which is the R value, which for this


graph is 8165.


And that RV value can actually tell us


about the strength and direction of the


linear correlation. The closer the r


value is to one or negative 1, the


stronger the correlation. The closer it


is to zero, the weaker the linear


correlation. And if the number is


positive or negative, that just tells us


whether it's a positive or negative


linear correlation. So in this question,


because 8165 is fairly close to pos1,


that tells us there is a strong positive


linear correlation between the two


variables. And we could also get


something called the coefficient of


determination. That's just the R value


squared, which if we squared our R


value, we would get about 2/3. And what


we can use the R squar value for is to


determine what percentage of the


variation in the dependent variable can


be explained by the variation in the


independent variable. So if we change


this decimal value to a percentage,


that's 66.67%.


So we would say that 66.67% 67%


of the variation in test score can be


explained by the variation in hours


studied and also like I said we can use


an equation or technology to get the


equation of this regression line that


reduces the squares of the residuals and


the regression equation for this line is


we say the predicted y value so y equals


x + 2 and now based on this regression


equation I can see that I've graphed my


regression line a little bit wrong. It's


close, but not exactly right. Right? The


y intercept should be at 2. I've got it


at about 2 and a half. So, let me adjust


it a little bit. And then using this


regression equation, I can make


estimations or predictions. Like, for


example, if someone studied for 4 hours,


what would the model predict they would


score on the quiz? What actually


happened was the person who studied for


4 hours got four on the quiz. But what


does the model predict if they studied


for 4 hours? Well, I can see it's going


to predict they score six. Let me make


sure the equation verifies that. If a


student studies for 4 hours, the model


predicts a test score of the predicted


score. So, yhat would equal 4 + 2, which


equals six. So, it would predict a score


of six on the quiz. So, I hope if you


followed along to the end of this video,


you now have a great foundational


understanding of all of the main areas


of statistics. Make sure you leave a


comment about what you want to see a top


10 of next.